Andrew Carnegie

Andrew Carnegie (November 25, 1835 – August 11, 1919) was a Scottish-American industrialist and philanthropist who led the expansion of the American steel industry in the late 19th century and became one of the richest Americans in history.

He became a leading philanthropist in the United States, Great Britain, and the British Empire. During the last 18 years of his life, he gave away around $350 million (equivalent to $6.9 billion in 2025 dollars), almost 90 percent of his fortune, to charities, foundations and universities. His 1889 article proclaiming "The Gospel of Wealth" called on the rich to use their wealth to improve society, expressed support for progressive taxation and an estate tax, and stimulated a wave of philanthropy.

Early Life

Carnegie was born in Dunfermline, Scotland, to William Carnegie and Margaret (Morrison) Carnegie in a typical weaver's cottage. He immigrated to what is now Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, with his parents in 1848 at age 12.

Carnegie started work in a cotton mill and later worked as a telegrapher. His first job in 1848 was as a bobbin boy, changing spools of thread in a cotton mill 12 hours a day, 6 days a week in a Pittsburgh cotton factory. His starting wage was $1.20 per week.

In 1849, Carnegie became a telegraph messenger boy in the Pittsburgh Office of the Ohio Telegraph Company. He was a hard worker and memorized all of the locations of Pittsburgh's businesses and the faces of important men. Within a year he was promoted to an operator.

Colonel James Anderson opened his personal library of 400 volumes to working boys each Saturday night. Carnegie was a consistent borrower and later resolved that "if ever wealth came to me, [to see to it] that other poor boys might receive opportunities similar to those for which we were indebted to the nobleman."

Railroad Years

Starting in 1853, Thomas A. Scott of the Pennsylvania Railroad employed Carnegie as a secretary/telegraph operator at a salary of $4.00 per week. When Carnegie was 24 years old, Scott asked him if he could handle being superintendent of the Western Division of the Pennsylvania Railroad.

On December 1, 1859, Carnegie officially became superintendent of the Western Division. He hired his sixteen-year-old brother Tom to be his personal secretary and telegraph operator. As superintendent, Carnegie made a salary of $1500 a year.

Scott helped him with his first investments. In 1855, Scott made it possible for Carnegie to invest $500 in the Adams Express Company, which contracted with the Pennsylvania to carry its messengers. The money was secured by his mother's placing of a $600 mortgage on the family's $700 home.

Civil War Years

In spring 1861, Carnegie joined the U.S. Military Telegraph Corps and was appointed by Scott, who was now Assistant Secretary of War in charge of military transportation, as Superintendent of the Military Railways and the Union Government's telegraph lines in the East. Carnegie helped open the rail lines into Washington, D.C. that the rebels had cut; he rode the locomotive pulling the first brigade of Union troops to reach Washington, D.C.

Bridge and Steel Industry

In 1864, Carnegie was one of the early investors in the Columbia Oil Company in Venango County, Pennsylvania. In one year, the firm yielded over $1 million in cash dividends.

After the war, Carnegie left the railroads to devote his energies to the ironworks trade. Carnegie worked to develop several ironworks, eventually forming the Keystone Bridge Works and the Union Ironworks in Pittsburgh.

Through Keystone, Carnegie supplied the steel for and owned shares in the landmark Eads Bridge project across the Mississippi River at St. Louis, Missouri (completed 1874).

In 1868, at age 33, Carnegie wrote about his plans to limit his income to $50,000 per annum and devote surplus wealth to benevolent purposes. He expressed concern that "Man must have no idol and the amassing of wealth is one of the worst species of idolatry!"

Steel Empire (1875-1900)

Carnegie made his fortune in the steel industry, controlling the most extensive integrated iron and steel operations ever owned by an individual in the United States. One of his innovations was in the cheap and efficient mass production of steel by adopting and adapting the Bessemer process, which allowed the high carbon content of pig iron to be burnt away in a controlled and rapid way during steel production.

The second innovation was in his vertical integration of all suppliers of raw materials. In 1883, Carnegie bought the rival Homestead Steel Works, which included an extensive plant served by tributary coal and iron fields, a 425-mile-long railway, and a line of lake steamships.

By 1889, the U.S. output of steel exceeded that of the UK, and Carnegie owned a large part of it. Carnegie's empire grew to include the J. Edgar Thomson Steel Works in Braddock, Pennsylvania, the Pittsburgh Bessemer Steel Works, the Lucy Furnaces, and numerous other facilities.

Carnegie's success was also due to his relationship with the railroad industries, which not only relied on steel for track, but were also making money from steel transport. United States trade tariffs were also working in favor of the steel industry. Legal documents released in 1900 revealed how favorable the tariffs had been to Carnegie's business interests.

U.S. Steel (1901)

In 1901, Carnegie was 65 years of age and considering retirement. John Pierpont Morgan, a banker and America's most important financial deal maker, observed how efficiently Carnegie produced profits. Morgan envisioned an integrated steel industry and needed to buy out Carnegie and several other major producers.

The buyout was secretly negotiated by Charles M. Schwab and was the largest such industrial takeover in United States history to date. Morgan concluded negotiations on March 2, 1901, and formed the United States Steel Corporation. It was the first corporation in the world with a market capitalization of over $1 billion.

Carnegie's steel enterprises were bought out for $303,450,000. His share amounted to $225.64 million (in 2025, $8.73 billion), which was paid to him in the form of 5%, 50-year gold bonds. The bonds were to be delivered to the Hudson Trust Company of Hoboken, New Jersey, where a special vault was built to house the physical bulk of nearly $230 million worth of bonds.

Scholar and Activist (1880-1900)

Carnegie befriended the English poet Matthew Arnold, the English philosopher Herbert Spencer, and the American humorist Mark Twain, as well as being in correspondence and acquaintance with most of the U.S. Presidents, statesmen, and notable writers.

In 1879, Carnegie constructed swimming baths for the people of his hometown in Dunfermline. In the following year, Carnegie gave £8,000 for the establishment of a Dunfermline Carnegie Library in Scotland.

In 1881, Carnegie took his family, including his 70-year-old mother, on a trip to the United Kingdom. They toured Scotland and enjoyed several receptions. The highlight was a return to Dunfermline, where Carnegie's mother laid the foundation stone of a Carnegie Library which he funded.

In 1886, Carnegie's younger brother Thomas died at age 43.

Carnegie wrote about his experiences in a book entitled "An American Four-in-hand in Britain." In 1886, Carnegie wrote "Triumphant Democracy," his most radical work to date. Liberal in its use of statistics, the book argued that the American republican system of government was superior to the British monarchical system. The book created considerable controversy in the UK but sold over 40,000 copies.

Carnegie became a regular contributor to numerous magazines, most notably "The Nineteenth Century" and the influential "North American Review." In 1889, Carnegie published "Wealth" in the June issue of the "North American Review." After reading it, Gladstone requested its publication in Britain, where it appeared as "The Gospel of Wealth" in "The Pall Mall Gazette."

Carnegie argued that the life of a wealthy industrialist should comprise two parts: the gathering and accumulation of wealth, and the subsequent distribution of this wealth to benevolent causes.

Anti-imperialism

In the aftermath of the Spanish-American War, the United States seemed poised to annex Cuba, Guam, Puerto Rico and the Philippines. Carnegie strongly opposed the idea of American colonies. He opposed the annexation of the Philippines almost to the point of supporting William Jennings Bryan against McKinley in 1900.

In 1898, Carnegie tried to arrange independence for the Philippines. As the Spanish-American War concluded, the United States purchased the Philippines from Spain for $20 million. Carnegie personally offered $20 million to the Philippines so that the Filipino people could purchase their independence from the United States. However, nothing came of the offer.

In 1898 Carnegie joined the American Anti-Imperialist League, in opposition to the U.S. annexation of the Philippines. Its membership included former presidents Grover Cleveland and Benjamin Harrison and literary figures such as Mark Twain.

Philanthropist (1901-1919)

Carnegie spent his last years as a philanthropist. From 1901 forward, public attention was turned from his shrewd business acumen to the public-spirited way in which he devoted himself to philanthropic projects.

He provided $25,000 a year to the movement for spelling reform. His organization, the Simplified Spelling Board, created the "Handbook of Simplified Spelling," which was written wholly in reformed spelling.

Libraries

Among his many philanthropic efforts, the establishment of public libraries throughout the United States, Britain, Canada, New Zealand, and other English-speaking countries was especially prominent. Carnegie was inspired by meetings with philanthropist Enoch Pratt (1808-1896). The Enoch Pratt Free Library (1886) of Baltimore, Maryland, impressed Carnegie deeply; he said, "Pratt was my guide and inspiration."

The first Carnegie Library opened in 1883 in Dunfermline. His method was to provide funds to build and equip the library, but only on the condition that the local authority matched that by providing the land and a budget for operation and maintenance.

To secure local interest, in 1885, he gave $500,000 to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, for a public library; in 1886, he gave $250,000 to Allegheny City, Pennsylvania, for a music hall and library; and he gave $250,000 to Edinburgh, Scotland, for a free library.

In total, Carnegie funded some 3,000 libraries, located in 47 U.S. states, and also in Canada, Britain, Ireland, Belgium, Serbia, France, Australia, New Zealand, South Africa, the West Indies, and Fiji. He also donated £50,000 to help set up the University of Birmingham in 1899.

Historian Richard White noted that many steelworkers employed by Carnegie "despised" his library in Homestead, Pennsylvania. "Carnegie imposed work rules that deprived his employees of virtually all their leisure; then he built a library and lectured them on how to spend time they did not have."

Education and Science

In 1900, Carnegie gave $2 million to start the Carnegie Institute of Technology (CIT) at Pittsburgh and the same amount in 1902 to create the Carnegie Institution at Washington, D.C., to encourage research and discovery.

CIT is now known as Carnegie Mellon University after it merged with the Mellon Institute of Industrial Research. Carnegie also served on the Boards of Cornell University and Stevens Institute of Technology.

In 1911, Carnegie became a sympathetic benefactor to George Ellery Hale, who was trying to build the 100-inch Hooker Telescope at Mount Wilson in California, and donated an additional ten million dollars to the Carnegie Institution. The telescope saw first light on November 2, 1917, with Carnegie still alive.

Scottish Universities

In 1901, in Scotland, he gave $10 million to establish the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland. It was created by a deed signed on June 7, 1901, and incorporated by royal charter on August 21, 1902. The establishing gift of $10 million was then an unprecedented sum.

He was subsequently elected Lord Rector of University of St. Andrews in December 1901, and formally installed as such in October 1902, serving until 1907.

Dunfermline

He donated large sums of money to Dunfermline, the place of his birth. In addition to a library, Carnegie bought the private estate which became Pittencrieff Park and opened it to all members of the public, establishing the Carnegie Dunfermline Trust to benefit the people of Dunfermline. A statue of Carnegie was built between 1913 and 1914 in the park as a commemoration for his creation of the park.

Music

Carnegie was a major patron of music. He was a founding financial backer of Jeannette Thurber's National Conservatory of Music of America in 1885. He built the music performing venue Carnegie Hall in New York City; it opened in 1891 and remained in his family until 1925.

His interest in music led him to fund the construction of 7,000 pipe organs in churches and temples, with no apparent preference for any religious denomination or sect.

Other Benefactions

In 1901, Carnegie also established large pension funds for his former employees at Homestead and, in 1905, for American college professors. The latter fund evolved into TIAA-CREF.

Carnegie was a large benefactor of the Tuskegee Institute for Black American education under Booker T. Washington. He helped Washington create the National Negro Business League.

In 1904, he founded the Carnegie Hero Fund for the United States and Canada (a few years later also established in the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Norway, Sweden, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Belgium, Denmark, and Germany) for the recognition of deeds of heroism.

Carnegie contributed $1.5 million in 1903 for the erection of the Peace Palace at The Hague; and he donated $150,000 for a Pan-American Palace in Washington as a home for the International Bureau of American Republics.

In 1913, he gave a further $10 million to endow the Carnegie United Kingdom Trust, a grant-making foundation. He transferred to the trust the charge of all his existing and future benefactions, other than university benefactions in the United Kingdom.

When it became obvious that Carnegie could not give away his entire fortune within his lifetime, he established the Carnegie Corporation of New York in 1911 "to promote the advancement and diffusion of knowledge and understanding" and continue his program of giving.

Carnegie was honored for his philanthropy and support of the arts by initiation as an honorary member of Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia fraternity on October 14, 1917, at the New England Conservatory of Music in Boston, Massachusetts.

Death

Carnegie died on August 11, 1919, in Lenox, Massachusetts, at his Shadow Brook estate, of bronchial pneumonia. He had already given away $350,695,653 (approximately $6.9 billion in 2025 dollars) of his wealth. After his death, his last $30 million was given to foundations, charities, and to pensioners.

He was buried at Sleepy Hollow Cemetery in Sleepy Hollow, New York. His intentionally simple gravestone, in the form of the Celtic cross, is located on the Arcadia Hebron plot of land at the corner of Summit Avenue and Dingle Road. Carnegie is buried only a few yards away from union organizer Samuel Gompers, another important figure of industry in the Gilded Age.

Controversies

Johnstown Flood (1889)

Carnegie was one of more than 50 members of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club, which has been blamed for the Johnstown Flood that killed 2,209 people in 1889.

Carnegie's partner Henry Clay Frick had formed the exclusive South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club high above Johnstown, Pennsylvania. The sixty-odd club members were the leading business tycoons of Western Pennsylvania and included among their number Frick's best friend, Andrew Mellon, his attorneys Philander Knox and James Hay Reed, as well as Frick's business partner, Carnegie.

High above the city, near the small town of South Fork, the South Fork Dam was originally built between 1838 and 1853 by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania as part of a canal system. With the coming-of-age of railroads superseding canal barge transport, the lake was abandoned by the Commonwealth, sold to the Pennsylvania Railroad, and sold again to private interests, and eventually came to be owned by the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club in 1881.

The dam was 72 feet high and 931 feet long. Between 1881, when the club was opened, and 1889, the dam frequently sprang leaks and was patched, mostly with mud and straw. A previous owner removed and sold for scrap the three cast iron discharge pipes that previously allowed a controlled release of water.

Such repair work, a reduction in height, and unusually high snowmelt and heavy spring rains combined to cause the dam to give way on May 31, 1889, resulting in twenty million tons of water sweeping down the valley as the Johnstown Flood.

When word of the dam's failure was telegraphed to Pittsburgh, Frick and other members of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club gathered to form the Pittsburgh Relief Committee for assistance to the flood victims as well as determining never to speak publicly about the club or the flood. This strategy was a success, and Knox and Reed were able to fend off all lawsuits that would have placed blame upon the club's members.

Although Cambria Iron and Steel's facilities were heavily damaged by the flood, they returned to full production within a year. After the flood, Carnegie built Johnstown a new library to replace the one built by Cambria's chief legal counsel Cyrus Elder, which was destroyed in the flood.

Homestead Strike (1892)

The Homestead Strike was a bloody labor confrontation lasting 143 days in 1892, one of the most serious in U.S. history. The conflict was centered on Carnegie Steel's main plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania, and grew out of a labor dispute between the Amalgamated Association of Iron and Steel Workers (AA) and the Carnegie Steel Company.

Carnegie left on a trip to Scotland before the unrest peaked. In doing so, Carnegie left mediation of the dispute in the hands of his associate and partner Henry Clay Frick. Frick was well known in industrial circles for maintaining staunch anti-union sentiment.

With the collective bargaining agreement between the union and company expiring at the end of June, Frick and the leaders of the local AA union entered into negotiations in February. With the steel industry doing well and prices higher, the AA asked for a wage increase; the AA represented about 800 of the 3,800 workers at the plant. Frick immediately countered with an average 22% wage decrease that would affect nearly half the union's membership and remove a number of positions from the bargaining unit.

The union and company failed to come to an agreement, and management locked the union out. Workers considered the stoppage a "lockout" by management and not a "strike" by workers. Frick brought in thousands of strikebreakers to work the steel mills and Pinkerton agents to safeguard them.

On July 6, the arrival of a force of 300 Pinkerton agents from New York City and Chicago, Illinois, resulted in a fight in which 10 men—seven strikers and three Pinkertons—were killed and hundreds were injured. Pennsylvania Governor Robert Pattison ordered two brigades of the state militia to the strike site.
